manuscript/chapter1.md, before:

# Decision-making, belief, and behavioral biases

{width=40%,float=right}
![Mond-vergleich Illusion](images/1_optical-illusion.png)

**Question: Which of the orange dots is bigger?**

**Answer: They are the same size**

Go ahead, look again to make sure. As you may have already guessed, this is a simple optical illusion.  The brain is wired to make quick and efficient decisions with the help of shortcuts (what psychologists call heuristics).  Many day to day decisions are made the same way. The brain interprets data, such as these images, and makes relatively quick (but sometimes incorrect) decision.  The tendency to think in certain ways is called a cognitive bias and it can lead to systematically poor decisions.

## The ambiguity effect

I> ## Formal definition
I>
I> The ambiguity effect is a cognitive bias where decision making is affected by a lack of information, or "ambiguity." The effect implies that people tend to select options for which the probability of a favorable outcome is known, over an option for which the probability of a favorable outcome is unknown.

Simply stated, the ambiguity effect is the tendency to select an option where the outcome is known over one where the outcome is ambiguous.  On the surface, this might seem helpful.  After all, why would one pass up a sure thing and take chances?  However, the result of the ambiguity effect is a gradual slide away from agility altogether.

The ambiguity effect tends to come up often during planning.  Imagine an agile team sitting down to story sizing.  Each person has their fibonacci sequence cards in front of them and they are attentively listening to the product owner read out the user story and acceptance criteria.

D> ## Planning poker scenario:
D>
D> Product owner just finished reading a user story and is discussing the acceptance criteria with the team.  
D>
D> Team member A: We need a mockup for that before we can size it.  
D>
D> Team member B: Yes, we really should have mockups for all stories otherwise we just need to pad the size of the story to factor in the unknowns.

This scenario is very common for teams who are transitioning to agile.  The reality of the matter is that the story is exactly the same size whether it has a mockup or not.  However, team members will feel more comfortable sizing stories that have little to no ambiguity.

T> ## Product Owner Tip:
T>
T> Learn what triggers the team's ambiguity effect and try to write user stories that avoid hitting it.  A low-fidelity mockup may take 30 minutes of your time but could remove a lot of doubt and worry from team members.

Commit message:

Edit of the guidance for the ambiguity effect.

manuscript/chapter1.md, after:

# Decision-making, belief, and behavioral biases

{width=40%,float=right}
![Mond-vergleich Illusion](images/1_optical-illusion.png)

**Question: Which of the orange dots is bigger?**

**Answer: They are the same size**

Go ahead, look again to make sure. As you may have already guessed, this is a simple optical illusion.  The brain is wired to make quick and efficient decisions with the help of shortcuts (what psychologists call heuristics).  Many day to day decisions are made the same way. The brain interprets data, such as these images, and makes relatively quick (but sometimes incorrect) decision.  The tendency to think in certain ways is called a cognitive bias and it can lead to systematically poor decisions.

## The ambiguity effect

I> ## Formal definition
I>
I> The ambiguity effect is a cognitive bias where decision making is affected by a lack of information, or "ambiguity." The effect implies that people tend to select options for which the probability of a favorable outcome is known, over an option for which the probability of a favorable outcome is unknown.

Simply stated, the ambiguity effect is the tendency to select an option where the outcome is known over one where the outcome is ambiguous.  On the surface, this might seem helpful.  After all, why would one pass up a sure thing and take chances?  However, the result of the ambiguity effect is a gradual slide away from agility altogether.

The ambiguity effect tends to come up often during planning.  Imagine an agile team sitting down to story sizing.  Each person has their fibonacci sequence cards in front of them and they are attentively listening to the product owner read out the user story and acceptance criteria.

D> ## Planning poker scenario:
D>
D> *Product owner just finished reading a user story and is discussing the acceptance criteria with the team.*  
D>
D> **Team member A:** We need a mockup for that before we can size it.  
D>
D> **Team member B:** Yes, we really should have mockups for all stories otherwise we just need to pad the size of the story to factor in the unknowns.

This scenario is very common for teams who are transitioning to agile.  The reality of the matter is that the story is exactly the same size whether it has a mockup or not.  However, team members will feel more comfortable sizing stories that have little to no ambiguity because they falsely equate ambiguity with risk.

The concepts of ambiguity and risk are not the same.  Ambiguity, in this scenario, is merely the presence of multiple solutions that could correctly fulfill the requirements of the story.  There is nothing inherently risky in that.  As agile team members, we must strive to become masters of recognizing when we are reacting to ambiguity as if it were risk.
